The point is to make you happy.

Baseball makes me deliriously happy. Baseball, with standings and leaderboards and the whole deal, nourishes my soul. If following baseball won't make you happy, please do something that will instead. Nobody wants you to be unhappy. But if baseball offers even the potential to make you happy, I want to help you get there.

You don't like baseball, though? Don't give up. I hated onions for decades, but a number of caring people taught me how to cut them, how to cook them, what to cook them in and what function they serve, and now onions make me happy almost every single day. Not every great joy comes as easily as a mother's love or a satisfying sneeze, and any number of my favorite things -- Prince, The New Yorker, Saturdays with the internet turned off -- are loves that developed only because somebody explained to me how to do so.

I want you to be happy. Here's what I've learned about the how.
COLUMBIA, S.C. – Tim Tebow has a way of re-writing scripts, of changing course when one least expects it, which is how he ended up here in the first place, clad in the fluorescent colors of the Columbia Fireflies, four stops and thousands of miles from Citi Field and the New York Mets club that indulged his dream.

Launch a baseball career after bottoming out as an NFL quarterback? Tebow was not joking.

Launch a baseball some 375 feet to the opposite field for a home run in his first true professional at-bat?

Well, that happened too, and you almost had to be at Spirit Communications Park to believe it.
LOS ANGELES -- Yasiel Puig showed Wednesday he knows exactly what it would take to dig his way out of the No. 8 hole in the Los Angeles Dodgers' lineup.

Dropped one spot before the pitcher because of what manager Dave Roberts called an inconsistent spring, Puig blasted his first home run of the young season when he waited out a changeup from the San Diego Padres’ Trevor Cahill and tucked it just inside the left-field foul pole.

It was one of two hits for Puig in the Dodgers’ 3-1 victory over the Padres, as the team's lightning rod for attention collected a sixth-inning single as well.

“I was focusing on bettering my pitch recognition every day, working with [hitting coach] Turner Ward every day just to try to better my swing,” Puig said through a team interpreter.
With Ward, Puig is working on hitting the ball in the air more, a move that Roberts hopes will take advantage of the slugger’s strength.

“I think the game today, guys are stronger and there is [a pitcher’s] velocity,” Roberts said. “You put the ball on the ground, we have a lot of data to gather up ground balls [on defense]. With Yasiel, he’s so strong, he can hit the ball out of the ballpark anywhere. And yeah, if he can elevate the ball pretty much anywhere, he has a chance.”

Never one to shy away from a dangerous question when a cliché will do, Puig joked about his motivation for the season. “What I think about is putting the ball in the air or else I’m going to have no money in my pocket,” said Puig, who will be doing just fine financially since he is actually signed through 2018.

For all of his flashy play, Puig said he recognizes the importance of team play. There are subtleties in it, though, like accepting a role of batting eighth even if you envision yourself as a hitter who belongs in a more high-profile spot.

“I’m not used to it, but that was the position I was given and I’m going to ask God to keep me in the lineup,” Puig said. “I will try to do my job.”

Part of that job is understanding that others are vying for high-profile roles too.

“My teammates are doing a great job,” Puig said. “They are all in the right [lineup] position and they have all been doing their job. They are in the position that is right for them. Now it’s my turn.”

Roberts was asked if Puig looks motivated to shake his role in the eight hole. “I don’t know. I think that is a question for Yasiel,” Roberts said. “I just know the at-bat quality he’s giving us, and just knowing that there is a lot to be said for a lineup that is stressing a pitcher, one through eight, and Yasiel does that.”

Puig’s career best for home runs in a season is 19, which he reached in just 104 games during his dynamic rookie season of 2013. He hit 16 home runs in 148 games in 2014. He went deep 11 times in each of the past two seasons.

If the coaching staff’s plan is successful, and Puig stays motivated, a season of at least 20 home runs would seem realistic. It could move him into a middle-of-the-order role as the season progresses, or if he doesn’t go anywhere, he could end up as one of the more feared No. 8 hitters in baseball.

At first blush, anyway, Roberts thinks Puig could be up for the challenge.

“Yeah, I’m glad that they are saying that,” Puig said when told that Roberts is pleased with his work ethic so far. “I am focused on my work. I’m focused on my preparation. And I’m going to continue doing my job.”
The Cincinnati Reds say they are "really concerned" for suspended minor leaguer Ian Kahaloa, calling an online video in which the infielder appears to use a recreational drug "alarming."

A Snapchat video, which became public last month, shows Kahaloa apparently snorting a white substance.

Reds player development director Jeff Graupe told the Cincinnati Enquirer that "to the best of our understanding" it is Kahaloa in the video.

"We're obviously really concerned," Graupe told the newspaper. "We're working to get Ian the help and assistance that we believe he needs to get his long-term future to a more stable place. We're kind of putting the baseball on the backburner."

Kahaloa, a pitcher, was among eight players suspended Tuesday by Major League Baseball's minor league drug program. He received a 50-game ban for a second positive test for a drug of abuse.

Graupe said the Reds held Kahaloa out of spring training because of concerns about his drug use.

Kahaloa's agent, Dave Matranga of PSI Sports, told the Enquirer that Kahaloa is currently in a drug treatment program.

A fifth-round pick by the Reds in 2015, Kahaloa, 19, was playing for the Billings Mustangs of the Pioneer League. He was listed as the No. 16 prospect in the Reds' system by ESPN's Keith Law during the offseason.

Information from The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Blake Treinen is tired of the whole Mr. Nice Guy routine.

He’s not tired of pretending to be nice (which he doesn’t). He’s not tired of actually being nice (which he is, almost to a fault). What he is tired of is talking about whether he’s too nice to succeed at his new job. He would never admit to that, of course, because he’s too nice. But you can just tell.

It was clear Monday morning, when, hours before first pitch of the Washington Nationals’ season opener, Treinen -- the newly anointed closer for the defending NL East champs -- addressed a swarm of reporters. Although the word “nice” wasn’t technically used in any of the questions (at least not this time), the overriding subtext of the whole scrum was something along these lines: Are you sure you’re cut out to handle the pressure cooker that comes with being a major league closer, especially in a town that’s been searching for a real-deal closer since pretty much ever?

To his credit, Treinen answered each and every question calmly and thoughtfully, but there seemed to be something decidedly worn-down about him.

“It's exciting for me and my family,” he said, his arms folded across his chest, just below the silver cross that hangs from his neck. “Just the opportunity to come in and have the game on the line -- it's fun. I feel very honored to have the opportunity. I’m not going to try to change anything. Just going to continue to do what's made me successful and just go from there.”

In contrast to the words coming out of his mouth, the inflection in Treinen’s voice was a little flatter than usual, his smile a little dimmer. In general, he looked and sounded a whole lot like a guy who was ready to stop talking about his job and start doing it.

It’s a conversation that’s been going on for the better part of the past two months, ever since the first day of spring training. That’s when Treinen, one of three in-house candidates to fill the Nats' gaping void at the closer position, stood in front of his locker in West Palm Beach, Florida, and fielded query after query about his makeup. About whether a 28-year-old former starter who’s so gosh-darned agreeable could possibly be fit for an end-of-game role typically reserved for thick-skinned, fire-breathing whackadoodles.

“People joke about that, about me being too much of a nice guy,” Treinen said at the time. “I'm not going to change who I am. I was raised how I am. My morals direct me the way that I am. But when I'm between the lines, I still know how to compete. There's some dog in me.”

A few lockers away from Treinen was fellow closer candidate Koda Glover, a Mohawk-wearing 23-year-old who was drafted as a closer, has been billed as the closer of the future and who walks and talks precisely like a thick-skinned, fire-breathing whackadoodle. A couple cubbies over from Glover was Shawn Kelley, a boisterous veteran reliever who last year saved seven games for Washington and who, although he’s never been a full-time closer, is about as alpha male as they come. Then there’s Treinen, a devout Christian who fawns over his 3-month-old daughter Addison, obsesses about crossword puzzles in the clubhouse and is a gifted artist who aspires to be a landscape architect when his playing days are over.

"People joke about that, about me being too much of a nice guy. I'm not going to change who I am. I was raised how I am. My morals direct me the way that I am. But when I'm between the lines, I still know how to compete. There's some dog in me."

Blake Treinen
Following a seven-week audition in which all three pitchers acquitted themselves just fine, the Nationals waited until the last possible moment to officially name Treinen their closer. When manager Dusty Baker informed Treinen of the decision, he was surprised to find out that his reliever, who in typical nice-guy fashion hadn’t been publicly stumping for the gig, secretly coveted the role all along.

“We asked him that last day when we made up our minds,” Baker said. “He said he would love the opportunity to close. He certainly has the stuff to. I asked him why he never stressed that or mentioned that to us and he said that it wasn’t his place to do it. He’s an awfully nice guy with very good stuff on the mound and very respectful. There are a lot of guys who would have been politicking for that. He said he wanted it, but only after we asked him.”

The fact that it took the Nats so long to ask Treinen was slightly odd, considering how dominant he was during spring training. In six Grapefruit League appearances, the 28-year-old righty allowed just two hits and no earned runs while tallying 11 strikeouts in 5⅔ innings. This comes after a breakout 2016 season in which he finished among the top NL’s top 10 relievers in ERA (2.28), holds (22) and strand rate (84 percent), and finally figured out how to get lefties out (.221 batting average against). Given the data, the most logical explanation as to why Baker and GM Mike Rizzo might have been hedging on Treinen -- besides the fact that last postseason showed the importance of having shutdown relievers pitch before the ninth inning -- was that they had concerns about his chromosomal construction. As it turned out, Opening Day was a damn good DNA test.

When Treinen took the mound in the top of the ninth inning of Washington’s opener against the Marlins with his team up 4-2, he did so with the fresh sting of failure in his mind. Two days earlier in an exhibition game at the Naval Academy, he made his first appearance since being named closer and promptly coughed up the lead. Granted, the game didn't count. And granted, it wasn’t totally his fault (the game-tying run scored on an error). Still, a blown save is a blown save -- especially when it comes on a maiden voyage. As if that weren’t enough, the first Marlins batter Treinen faced on Opening Day was none other than Giancarlo Stanton, the massive Miami cleanup hitter whose chiseled frame is only slightly smaller than his colossal contract (at $325 million, the biggest in baseball). Unfazed by the moment, Washington's new closer retired Stanton on a foul pop, then fanned power hitting lefty Justin Bour and 2016 All-Star Marcell Ozuna back to back to seal the deal. The 1-2-3 outing served as a reminder that, as nice as Treinen is off the mound, he’s just as nasty on it.

An extreme sinkerballer, Treinen posted a 66 percent ground-ball rate last year that was the best of any major league pitcher not named Zach Britton. His average sinker velocity was 95.2 mph, the fifth-fastest in baseball on such pitches. He’s even touched triple digits with his dive-bomber, a feat so rare for a sinkerballer that it resulted in Treinen being the subject of a clue on “Jeopardy!” Unlike Britton, though, who uses his sinker almost exclusively (92 percent), Treinen gives plenty of love to a filthy slider he throws roughly a third of the time and that limited opposing hitters to a .120 average last season. Against the Marlins on Opening Day, he deployed his sinker on 13 of 17 pitches, averaging 97.2 mph in the process. The other four offerings were sliders, including the 3-2 doozy that punched out Bour and had his teammates gushing after the game.

“Would you rather have a 97 mile-per-hour pitch that moves a ton, or a 91 mile-per-hour pitch that moves a ton?” said catcher Matt Wieters. “They’re both good options.”

“The kind of stuff he has, he just has to get the ball over the plate,” said first baseman Ryan Zimmerman of Treinen, whose biggest knock (besides the whole nice-guy thing) has been a propensity to issue free passes: His 11.8 percent walk rate last year was the eighth highest among NL relievers (minimum 50 IP). “It’s hard to get consecutive hits off a guy like that. I think he's starting to learn how good he actually is.”

Whether Treinen can be that good consistently -- and how he’ll respond when he’s not -- remains to be seen.

“The ninth inning is as much about mentality as it is stuff,” said Wieters, who spent the last few years in Baltimore working with Britton, another noted nice guy who defies the closer stereotype. “He had a good start today, but we’re going to have to keep working on it this whole year.”

For what it’s worth, Treinen seemed a whole lot looser after his closer debut than before it. Instead of measuring his words in an effort to talk about a job that doubters weren’t sure he could do, he spoke freely and easily about the job he’d just done. He joked about how the Jumbotron radar gun was stuck on 94 for the every single one of his pitches. He made fun of himself, admitting that if he’d had to face a lefty like Bour a couple years ago, he surely would’ve been instructed to intentionally walk him. Standing in front of the same locker where, six hours earlier he’d been a shell of his normal self, he was back to being the pathologically pleasant pitcher that folks in D.C. have come to know.

“It means a lot that they chose me,” he said with a wide grin, arms down by his side. “My goal coming in was to perform well, to earn whatever spot they decided to give me. It's not going to change my approach. It's not going to change my confidence and my ability that I've been blessed to have. God gifted me with a sinker. I just need to be aggressive with it. Today I was. I executed some off-speed pitches when I needed to. Hopefully there's many more to come of those.”
The path to franchise success in the NFL has always been the draft, and picking great players remains essential to building a winner. So we were curious: Which draft provided each NFL team with its best haul of talent?

To find each team's best draft class ever, first we had to define "best." Fortunately, there's Pro Football Reference's Approximate Value (AV) metric. AV is a composite measure of a player's value to his team, based roughly on game appearances, game starts and awards such as Pro Bowl and All-Pro selections. Meaningful individual stats also help determine a player's AV, and the metric is boosted for players who are members of winning teams.

There have been 50 NFL drafts in what is known as the common draft era (since 1967), and we limited our rankings to this period. We added the AV for every pick in every class while with that team. Two other key caveats:

1. Before the era of unrestricted free agency began in 1992, teams had greater ability to keep players under team control, allowing more value to accrue to drafting teams for the purposes of this exercise.

2. The draft was 17 rounds from 1967 to 1976, and later moved to 12 rounds before being reduced to its current seven-round iteration in 1994. That matters, because our methodology definitely favors depth of class -- the more players in a class, the more possibilities for AV-related success -- and we think that's the best reflection of the impact that can be generated by a single NFL draft class. Smaller classes including one or two stars can make an impact, too, but history confirms that it's the higher-volume classes that more frequently help fuel enduring team success.


1. 1975 Dallas Cowboys (551 AV)

The Cowboys' class of 1975 proved the most productive draft class of any team in the common draft era. The group was known as "The Dirty Dozen," because 11 picks and one undrafted player made the final roster, headlined by Hall of Fame defensive tackle Randy White, the second overall pick in '75. Five members of the class became Pro Bowlers: White, linebackers Thomas "Hollywood" Henderson and Bob Breunig, tackle Pat Donovan and guard Herbert Scott. And five started the Cowboys' Super Bowl XII win over the Denver Broncos following the 1977 season.


2. 1971 Pittsburgh Steelers (526 AV)

The Steelers' 1974 draft class is often considered the best in NFL history for producing four Hall of Famers, twice as many as any class. But their 1971 class was deeper and might deserve more credit for propelling Pittsburgh to four Super Bowl titles in the 1970s. The class produced eight Super Bowl starters, including Hall of Fame LB Jack Ham (second round) and two-time Pro Bowl selections in defensive end Dwight White (fourth round) and strong safety Mike Wagner (11th round).

The 1974 Steelers class (including Hall of Famers Jack Lambert, Lynn Swann, John Stallworth and Mike Webster) would rank right behind the '71 class as the Steelers' best and would rank tied for third-best of any team (486). If you want to say '74 was better than '71, we won't argue.


3. 1981 New Orleans Saints (486 AV)

This class featured the No. 1 overall pick, Heisman Trophy-winning RB George Rogers, who ran for 1,674 yards as a rookie, Hall of Fame linebacker Rickey Jackson and other key contributors such as Pro Bowl tight end Hoby Brenner (third round) and defensive tackle Jim Wilks (12th round). The Saints' 1981 selectees might be the best draft class to never see postseason success. Though Jackson, Brenner and Wilks were among those who lasted long enough in New Orleans to see the Saints' string of playoff appearances from 1990 through 1992, the team never made it out of the wild-card round.

The 17-player class was the most productive in Saints history, but the 2006 class deserves an honorable mention. It was easily the most productive of class by any team since 2000, featuring RB Reggie Bush, S Roman Harper, G Jahri Evans and two seventh-rounders who played nearly 150 games with the Saints (G Zach Strief and WR Marques Colston). The signing of Drew Brees that year gets much of the credit for the team's Super Bowl win, but New Orleans' 2006 draft class shouldn't be overlooked.


4. 1975 Chicago Bears (473 AV)

This very deep class is headlined by one of the greatest running backs in NFL history, Walter Payton, who would carry the Bears' Super Bowl XX offense a decade later. Defensive end Mike Hartenstine was the other standout from this class. He played for 13 seasons and had eight starts for the '85 championship defense.

The 1965 class was before the common draft era, but it featured Hall of Famers Gale Sayers and Dick Butkus, who were picked Nos. 3 and No. 4 overall, respectively. But even if we included this group, its 347 AV pales in comparison with the '75 Bears class because of Sayers' and Butkus' relatively short careers.


5. 1977 New York Jets (435 AV)

This Jets class immediately followed Joe Namath's final season with the team and helped New York reach four postseasons in a six-year span, from 1981-86. The class featured tackle Marvin Powell (first round), wide receiver Wesley Walker (second round), and fan favorite/defensive tackle Joe Klecko (sixth round), an important piece of the famed "New York Sack Exchange."


6. 1973 Denver Broncos (406 AV)

The Broncos did not have a single winning season in their first 13 seasons, before the 1973 class marked the turning point in the franchise's fortunes, helping them reach the Super Bowl by the 1977 season. They hit on four of their first five picks in '73, including RB Otis Armstrong, who led the NFL in rushing in 1974, and LB Tom Jackson, who anchored the "Orange Crush" defense.


7. 1986 San Francisco 49ers (402 AV)

The 49ers' 1986 class might have been the deepest in history, featuring six players who played at least 100 games with San Francisco, including Hall of Famer DE Charles Haley; WR John Taylor, who caught the game-winning TD in the final seconds of Super Bowl XXIII; and Tom Rathman, a longtime backfield staple. This class provided a total of 53 seasons worth of players who would serve as primary starters.


8. 1968 Oakland Raiders (401 AV)

Hall of Famers Ken Stabler (second round) and Art Shell (third round) headlined Oakland's 1968 class, which would eventually lead the Raiders to their first Super Bowl title. Interestingly, the Raiders' first-round pick, Eldridge Dickey, provided almost no AV to Oakland. Dickey was drafted as a QB but moved to wideout when Stabler controversially won the starting job in training camp. Dickey would register only five catches in his NFL career.


9. 1985 Buffalo Bills (391 AV)

In 1985 the Bills drafted Bruce Smith, who went on to become the NFL's all-time sack leader in a Hall of Fame career, and WR Andre Reed, who also made the Hall of Fame. Both were important pieces of the team that won four straight AFC Championships. The NFL had competition from the USFL during this era, and Bills general manager Bill Polian had to convince Smith, the No. 1 overall pick, to play for the Bills instead of the USFL's Baltimore Stars.


10. 1996 Baltimore Ravens (384 AV)

The best draft in the Ravens' brief history was their very first. (In fact, the team was still known as the "Baltimore NFL Franchise" at the time of the '96 draft, having yet to choose a nickname after being prevented from using the Browns moniker). The first two picks in team history were Hall of Fame tackle Jonathan Ogden and Ray Lewis, a virtual certainty to be selected to the Hall on his first ballot. Lewis was the heart and soul of the team through 17 seasons, which included nine playoff berths and two Super Bowl championships. Return specialist Jermaine Lewis was another key member of Baltimore's '96 class.


11. 1983 Miami Dolphins (380 AV)

The 1983 draft provided more AV to the league as a whole than any other, and the Dolphins got the lion's share that year. Miami chose franchise QB Dan Marino in the first round and picked up WR Mark Clayton in the eighth, not to mention longtime punter Reggie Roby in the sixth. Marino and Clayton never won a championship but led their team to five playoff berths together.


12. 1975 San Diego Chargers (378 AV)

The Chargers made a whopping 24 picks in 1975, and went nearly all defense. They had four of the first 33 selections, and used three of them to draft three defensive linemen: Hall of Famer Fred Dean, Gary Johnson and Louie Kelcher, who formed "The Bruise Brothers," one of the most dominant lines in football during their era.


13. 1967 Minnesota Vikings (365 AV)

Hall of Fame defensive tackle and NFL MVP Alan Page, selected with the 15th overall pick in '67, anchored the "Purple People Eaters" defense that led Minnesota to four NFC championships. Two-time Pro Bowl defensive back Bobby Bryant (seventh round) was another key part of the Vikings' legendary defense, and two-time Pro Bowl wide receivers Gene Washington (first round) and Bob Grim (second round) were also selected that year.


14. 1981 Washington Redskins (341 AV)

The Redskins' first two picks were guards Mark May (first round) and Hall of Famer Russ Grimm (third round), part of the famous offensive line group affectionately known as "The Hogs." They also used their fifth-round pick on DE Dexter Manley, who remains the Redskins' all-time sack leader, and their eighth-round pick on wide receiver Charlie Brown. This draft helped Washington win a Super Bowl the following season, and players from this class remained with the Redskins through 1991 and two other championship seasons.


15. 1983 Houston Oilers (337 AV)

Hall of Fame guard Bruce Matthews was the overwhelming standout pick of the then-Oilers' 1983 class. The first-round pick played an incredible 19 seasons with the Oilers/Titans franchise, making 14 Pro Bowls. DBs Keith Bostic (second round) and Steve Brown (third round) were other high-value contributors from this class for Houston.


16. 1978 Green Bay Packers (320 AV)

Hall of Fame WR James Lofton (first round) headlined this class, but linebackers John Anderson (first round) and Mike Douglass (fifth round) were also solid picks. The 2005 Packers class is currently a distant third among Green Bay draft classes, and it's still accumulating AV, thanks to Aaron Rodgers. But Rodgers would have to duplicate his career to date to help his group catch the much deeper '78 Packer class.

Undoubtedly, there are some pre-common era drafts that would rival '78. The 1958 class could be the best Packers class ever, with Hall of Famers Jim Taylor and Ray Nitschke helping to form the foundation of the Packers 1960s dynasty.


17. 1973 New England Patriots (315 AV)

Hall of Fame guard John Hannah highlighted this deep Patriots class. In fact, Hannah has the most AV of any drafted Patriots player other than Tom Brady. Running back Sam Cunningham followed Hannah as the second of three Pats first-rounders in the '73 class, the third being wideout Darryl Stingley, whose career was tragically cut short when he was paralyzed in a preseason game in 1978.

Brady's class of 2000 would need him to play another six or seven years for it to surpass the AV of the '73 group.


18. 2004 Arizona Cardinals (307 AV)

Larry Fitzgerald (first round), Karlos Dansby (second round) and Darnell Dockett (third round) were the Cardinals' first three picks in 2004. Thirteen years later, the class still has three players in the league: Fitzgerald, Dansby and defensive end Antonio Smith (fifth round).


19. 1977 Cincinnati Bengals (307 AV)

The Bengals' 1977 draft class helped form the core of the team that made the franchise's first Super Bowl appearance in the 1981 season. Of the team's 19 selections, 16 made the roster, including one-time Bengals single-season sacks leader Eddie Edwards (first round) and tackle Mike Wilson (fourth round), who never missed a game in his eight seasons with Cincinnati.


20. 1967 Detroit Lions (304 AV)

The Lions' 1967 class featured RB Mel Farr (first round) and Hall of Fame defensive back Lem Barney (second round), who are still the only teammates to win offensive and defensive rookie of the year honors in the same season.


21. 2008 Atlanta Falcons (303 AV)

Matt Ryan (first round) led a deep 2008 Falcons class that also included tackle Sam Baker (first round), linebacker Curtis Lofton (second round), wide receiver Harry Douglas (third round), safety Thomas DeCoud (third round) and linebacker Kroy Biermann (fifth round). Ryan will probably generate several more seasons of strong AV, propelling the '08 Falcons several ranks higher on this list.


22. 1971 Los Angeles Rams (303 AV)

The Rams drafted Hall of Fame defensive end Jack Youngblood and six-time Pro Bowl linebacker Isiah Robertson with their two first-round picks in 1971. Youngblood replaced legend Deacon Jones, and the defensive duo helped the Rams win seven straight division titles, then an NFL record.


23. 1995 Tampa Bay Buccaneers (301 AV)

The Buccaneers drafted Hall of Famers Warren Sapp (No. 12 overall pick) and Derrick Brooks (No. 28 overall) with its two first-round picks. Together, they were the core of the historically great Bucs defense that led the franchise to its lone Super Bowl in 2002. This was a top-heavy draft class; the six other picks for Tampa that year combined to play just three seasons with the Buccaneers.


24. 2001 Indianapolis Colts (300 AV)

Reggie Wayne (first round) highlighted a 2001 class that also included tackle Ryan Diem (fourth round), who started for 11 seasons in Indianapolis. Hard as it might be to believe, this class outproduced the 1998 Peyton Manning class in terms of AV, because the next-best player in '98 was center Steve McKinney, who started for four seasons in Indy.


25. 1973 Philadelphia Eagles (297 AV)

The Eagles' top four draft picks from 1973 all played 150-plus games with the Eagles and laid the foundation for the 1980 Super Bowl run. That class included tackle Jerry Sisemore (first round), tight end Charle Young (first round), center Guy Morriss (second round) and safety Randy Logan (third round).


26. 1993 New York Giants (293 AV)

The Giants selected Hall of Fame defensive end Michael Strahan (second round) and five-time Pro-Bowl linebacker Jessie Armstead (eighth round) among their seven picks in the 1993 draft.


27. 1990 Seattle Seahawks (287 AV)

Hall of Fame defensive tackle Cortez Kennedy (first round) and three-time Pro Bowl running back Chris Warren (fourth round) headlined this class, which won't stand for long as the Seahawks' best. Seattle's three drafts from 2010-12 are the three best drafts by any team in the NFL since 2010. The 2012 class is still rolling, with production from quarterback Russell Wilson and linebacker Bobby Wagner.


28. 1984 Kansas City Chiefs (283 AV)

Tackle John Alt (first round) and defensive back Kevin Ross (seventh round) were among the best Chiefs ever at their positions, while nose tackle Bill Maas (1st round) was another excellent player in Kansas City for several seasons. Each of those three players made two Pro Bowls and combined for 31 seasons as starters at their positions.


29. 1967 Cleveland Browns (267 AV)

Not a lot of household names here -- final pick Ben Davis (17th round) was the only member of the class to make a Pro Bowl -- but the players Cleveland drafted in '67 combined to play more than 1,000 career games in the NFL. This class ranks among the franchise's best, because there were seven significant AV contributors.

Although they're before the common draft era, the Browns' 1957 and 1964 classes would rank among the best in franchise history. The '57 class included Hall of Famers Jim Brown and Gene Hickerson, and the '64 class had RB Leroy Kelly and WR Paul Warfield.


30. 2001 Carolina Panthers (224 AV)

The Panthers took LB Dan Morgan (first round), DT Kris Jenkins (second round), and WR Steve Smith (third round) with their first three picks in 2001. Along with 2002 No. 1 pick Julius Peppers, they helped lead Carolina to its first Super Bowl appearance in the 2003 season.


31. 2006 Houston Texans (190 AV)

The relatively young Texans franchise had its best draft in 2006. That year, they chose defensive end Mario Williams with the No. 1 overall pick, along with linebacker DeMeco Ryans (second round), tackle Eric Winston (third round) and tight end Owen Daniels (fourth round).


32. 1998 Jacksonville Jaguars (188 AV)

The Jaguars landed running back Fred Taylor and hard-hitting safety Donovin Darius in the first round of 1998. Taylor rushed for 11,271 career yards in Jacksonville and was the cornerstone of a memorable offensive attack. Time will tell if the Jags' 2014 class (QB Blake Bortles, WR Allen Robinson, WR Marqise Lee and LB Telvin Smith) can threaten 1998 for the franchise's top class.
FRISCO, Texas -- As part of his new life as the lead football analyst for CBS, Tony Romo's words will be analyzed over and over. It won't be anything new for him, since that was also the case during his tenure as quarterback of the Dallas Cowboys.

On Tuesday and Wednesday, Romo participated in two interviews, and many have seized on a comment he made about Cowboys owner and general manager Jerry Jones on 105.3 The Fan in Dallas on Wednesday.

"He's been great," Romo said. "He's been there for me through my entire time. There wasn't anybody who stood up for me more last year. That meant as much as anything, just the fact that he loved me and wanted good things for me. Things happen, and that's what happens in life. But you remember the people that help you along the way and appreciate you and love on you and give you grace and try and do the things that you'd hopefully want to do for others. He exemplifies that stuff.

"I really wish people would get a chance to see into his heart and the way he just loves this football team, loves his family and just loves the people that have done right by him. There's not a more loyal guy that you'll ever meet. He's always been that way, and he's always going to be that way."

The "there wasn't anybody who stood up for me more last year" -- when Romo was injured during a preseason game and ultimately lost his starting job to Dak Prescott -- has been viewed as a dig at head coach Jason Garrett.

In his conference call announcing his hiring by CBS Sports and the interview with the "Ben and Skin Show," Romo never mentioned Garrett, but he was never asked directly about Garrett, his offensive coordinator/head coach from 2007-16.

There has been a fraying in the relationship between Romo and Garrett over the past seven months.

There was a time Garrett would go to basketball games with Romo, Jason Witten and DeMarco Murray. Garrett and Romo spent time at Duke listening to the gospel of Mike Krzyzewski. They met with Larry Brown at SMU. He went to a Bruce Springsteen concert to celebrate Garrett's birthday last year.

A few weeks ago Garrett sat with Witten, Travis Frederick and Zack Martin as the Dallas Mavericks played the Golden State Warriors. All anybody could think was, "Where is Romo?"

At the NFL scouting combine, Garrett said he had spoken to Romo just once after the Cowboys' season ended. They have had a couple of hellos at different postseason events, like the celebration of Jerry Jones' selection for induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Houston the night before Super Bowl LI. But that's it.

Like Jones, Romo values loyalty.

Garrett is entering the third season of a five-year, $30 million contract he signed after the 2014 season -- a season that is generally considered Romo's best with 34 touchdown passes and just nine interceptions. Yes, Murray led the NFL in rushing with 1,845 yards, but Romo's play was sublime and he finished third in MVP voting.

Garrett was in a win-or-else situation at the time, as his contract expired after the season. After three straight 8-8 finishes from 2011-13, he needed to win or he would have been without a job. The Cowboys went 12-4 and Romo's level of play helped make Garrett one of the NFL's highest-paid coaches.

If you want to blame Romo for the 8-8 finishes, then fine, but where would the Cowboys have been without Romo?

Romo wasn't perfect, and he is not blameless in the relationship fraying. He didn't communicate as well as he could have with Garrett when he was rehabbing from the back injury he suffered last August. Garrett did not know about the heartfelt speech Romo made when it was clear he would be the backup, but the relationship started to turn before that.

Garrett did not address the possibility of Romo losing his job until well into the team's 11-game winning streak, which was at a point of no return because of the momentum the team had gained under Prescott.

Romo at least wanted the chance to compete for his job once he was healthy. While he disagreed with the decision, he was supportive of Prescott publicly and privately.

As part of his new job with CBS, Romo will have production meetings with coaches and players. The Cowboys will have at least two games on CBS with the Kansas City Chiefs and Los Angeles Chargers visiting AT&T Stadium, giving Romo and Garrett face time with each other.

Perhaps before then they will sit down and talk out their differences.
ALAMEDA, Calif. -- Reggie McKenzie was sitting at a table with three reporters at the Arizona Biltmore at last week’s NFL owners meetings, the crystal chalice he had just been awarded by the Sporting News as its NFL executive of the year serving as a centerpiece, of sorts.

So yeah, I had to ask the Oakland Raiders general manager: You gonna fill that thing up with Skittles?

McKenzie did not bite.

The reference was obvious, even if the inference was, too: McKenzie was not about to wax poetic on Marshawn Lynch, the Skittles-aholic author of Beast Mode, seeing as how his contract still belonged to the Seattle Seahawks and any mention of the running back could be perceived as tampering.

“Absolutely,” McKenzie said with a smile.

Besides ...

“He’s still retired,” McKenzie added.

Which makes Lynch visiting the Raiders on Wednesday with Seattle’s permission all the more intriguing and, as NFL Network reported, Lynch telling Oakland he was willing to come out of retirement to play for his hometown team.

ESPN NFL Insider Adam Schefter reported a deal between the Raiders and Lynch will “eventually” happen.

This much is true, though: With Lynch’s contract, which carries a salary cap hit of $9 million in 2017 and a base salary of $7 million in 2018, the Raiders would be averse to giving up picks in a trade, especially at that salary. Oakland would rather see Seattle, which simply cannot afford him at those numbers, cut him. The Raiders, who have just over $27.6 million in cap space and still want to extend quarterback Derek Carr, edge rusher Khalil Mack and right guard Gabe Jackson, could then negotiate a more team-friendly deal with Lynch.

Plus, there would be questions about how the notoriously free-spirited Lynch, who turns 31 on April 22 and was limited by injury to seven games and averaged 3.8 yards per carry in 2015, would fit in the Raiders’ culture, and what kind of teammate he’d be for a young team on the rise.

Perhaps answers came in his visit. Because the Raiders definitely have questions coming their way when it comes to being without a lead running back after Latavius Murray was allowed to leave for the Minnesota Vikings in free agency.

Oakland fans have been exhorting their prodigal son to return to the East Bay since reports first surfaced last month about Lynch potentially joining the Raiders. A Twitter poll I put up at the time was heavily in favor of the Raiders signing Lynch, over Adrian Peterson.


McKenzie did address concerns about a lead running back in Arizona, saying he did not want to see 5-foot-8 Mighty Mite change-of-pace backs Jalen Richard and DeAndre Washington get “beat up” by taking too much of the load.

“We’d like to use those guys in multiple ways,” McKenzie said. “Those two, as the dynamic duo, could get it done. You don’t want to just ride one all the time. Those two guys are two pretty good little backs.

“But would you want a banger sometimes, a bigger body to move the pile, or whatever? You could probably add something there. We think [fullback] Jamize Olawale can bang it in there and get two to eight yards, move the pile. I mean, it’s not like we’re suffering.”

Suffer Beast Mode, though? A healthy and focused Lynch would have opposing defenses aching.

“We’re going to keep plugging and if something falls our way, the draft’s got a lot of backs, in all sizes,” McKenzie said. “This roster will look a whole lot different from here to May.”

Pass the Skittles?
The football world's gossip mill is in full swing, and Transfer Talk is monitoring the whispers ahead of all the summer moves. Check out the latest deals here.

Alexis giving Gunners one last shot
Alexis Sanchez is going to give Arsenal one more chance to prove their ambition by sticking around for the final year of his contract, despite interest from Premier League champions-elect Chelsea.

The Daily Mirror reports that Sanchez is happy in London -- a possible hint that a transfer across the capital to Stamford Bridge could be his favoured move ahead of joining Juventus or Paris Saint-Germain -- but he is also aware Arsenal are unlikely to sell him to a direct rival, which is another reason that running his contract down is a viable option.

It is claimed that Arsenal have offered the Chile international £250,000-a-week to stay with them, but he wants to see if they make the necessary changes to the squad that will enable the Gunners to challenge for the Prem title before he commits.

Bayern teeing up big raise for Thiago
Bayern Munich hope to put an end to any Barcelona or Manchester City interest in Thiago Alcantara by offering the midfielder a new contract until 2021 that will make him one of the best-paid players in the club's history.

According to Sport, talks have already begun and the defending German champions hope that the faith Carlo Ancelotti has put in the 25-year-old will convince him to sign. The Spain international, brought to Bayern by Pep Guardiola in 2013, is on course to set a personal best for appearances in a season.

Bayern will lose the influence and experience of Xabi Alonso when he retires in the summer, meaning keeping Thiago in the team will become even more crucial.

Thiago Bayern laughing
Thiago's rumoured new deal is nothing to laugh about.
Mourinho making Perisic plea
Jose Mourinho wants Manchester United to beat Chelsea to the signing of Inter Milan's Ivan Perisic and is willing to spend €60 million to seal the deal.

Gazzetta Dello Sport reports that although Inter's new owners are ready to invest heavily this summer, they must do so within UEFA's Financial Fair Play regulations and are willing to sell one big name to land Domenico Berardi and Federico Bernardeschi.

United have drawn 12 times in the Premier League this season, the most of anyone in the division, but Croatia international Perisic, who has nine goals and three assists in Serie A, would go some way to providing them with the cutting edge they have lacked in front of goal.

Tap-ins
- The Sun reckons scouts from Manchester United, Arsenal and West Brom took in Benfica's game against Estoril on Wednesday as the Premier League sides weigh up moves for central defender Victor Lindelof, right-back Nelson Semedo and goalkeeper Ederson.

- Manchester United, Arsenal and Everton will all be disappointed to see the Leicester Mercury report that Kasper Schmeichel does not have a release clause in his contract. The 30-year-old, whose current deal with Leicester runs until 2021, has been a key figure on and off the pitch for the club in recent seasons.

- Stoke are ready to sell £18.3m club-record signing Giannelli Imbula at a loss, the Daily Telegraph reports, and could offload the 24-year-old former Porto midfielder for as little as £10m. It is claimed Juventus, Roma and Marseille showed interest last summer but Imbula will not be allowed to leave on loan.
We're back from the international break with a vengeance as Europe's top teams made up for lost time with two games this week. Juventus are still cruising, but the surge of Spanish giants Real Madrid can't be ignored as they rise to the top.

1. Real Madrid (+2)

Just when Zinedine Zidane's side seem to be flagging, they find another burst of energy. And it couldn't be coming at a better time given that the Champions League is up next. Real beat Alaves 3-0 despite not playing particularly well and then held on to defeat tiny Leganes 4-2 in midweek. Gareth Bale is fully fit and in form again. Alvaro Morata (hat trick vs. Leganes) and Karim Benzema are scoring. And the defence looks reasonably robust. They're two points clear of Barca with the Clasico in just three weeks.

2. Juventus (-1)

Max Allegri's side are cruising to the Serie A title, six points ahead of Roma with eight games to play, yet a pair of gutsy performances against Napoli caused Juventus to drop to second in the Power Rankings. Sunday's 1-1 draw in Naples was the result of a more conservative performance, while the midweek 3-2 Coppa Italia defeat didn't matter much as Juve went through on aggregate. There's little for Juve to fear at this point, though facing Barcelona next week in the Champions League will require maximum effort.

3. Bayern Munich (-1)

Robert Lewandowski scored three and set up two in the 6-0 thrashing of Augsburg, but the Bundesliga champions-elect were tripped up four days later. Despite taking 21 shots at Hoffenheim, Bayern could not find the net and were beaten 1-0.

4. Barcelona (+2)

Luis Enrique announced on March 1 that he'll step down as Barca manager after this season, and his team have responded with four wins in five La Liga games to remain within two points of Real at the top. It's a remarkable late-season surge that sees them in fine form heading into Champions League action. A 4-0 rout of Granada and 3-1 win over Jorge Sampaoli's Sevilla this week are testament to that.


Real Madrid's 4-2 win over Leganes in midweek keeps Zidane's side on course for the league title.
5. Chelsea (no change)

Chelsea's march to the Premier League title seemingly can't be stopped: Though the Blues lost 2-1 at home to Crystal Palace at the weekend, a game in which they had plenty of shots and couldn't equalise, they took a 2-1 win over Pep Guardiola's Man City in which Sergio Aguero & Co. were unable to prevail. Chelsea's resiliency under Antonio Conte is a major factor in their success.

6. Atletico Madrid (+3)

Wins over Malaga and Real Sociedad mean that Atletico have now claimed five straight victories in La Liga. That run, as well as Sevilla's failure to win in their last five matches, mean Diego Simeone's side are now third in the Spanish standings.

7. Tottenham (+1)

Don't count Spurs out yet! Though they're seven points behind Chelsea with eight games remaining, there's plenty of fight left in Mauricio Pochettino's side even without the injured Harry Kane. The 2-0 win at Burnley over the weekend came with a goal from Heung-Min Son, Kane's deputy, while a remarkable turnaround at Swansea saw Spurs score three times after the 87th minute to win 3-1. Few teams can match their spirit and self-belief at present.


ESPN FC's Alejandro Moreno focuses in on Sevilla's swift decline and Barcelona's 'unstoppable' first half at the Camp Nou.
8. AS Roma (new)

Roma may not be thinking of the title, given Juve's indomitable form, but their bigger battle is locking up second place -- and with it, the final automatic spot in the Champions League group stage. Roma's 2-0 win over Empoli at the weekend was standard fare for Luciano Spalletti's side, with Edin Dzeko scoring both goals to take his league tally to 23 goals in 30 appearances. Losing 3-2 to city rivals Lazio and being eliminated from the Coppa Italia on Tuesday was a bitter blow, but it doesn't threaten their ultimate objective.

9. Borussia Dortmund (-2)

After Thomas Tuchel's men were denied a Revierderby win by Schalke's equaliser in a 1-1 draw, Dortmund eased to a 3-0 win vs. Hamburg. Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang scored in both games and now has 25 Bundesliga goals this season.

10. Monaco (-6)

There were mixed fortunes in cup competitions for the French league leaders last week. First, Monaco fell 4-1 to Paris Saint-Germain in the league cup final, but then rebounded to beat Lille 2-1 and claim a place in the French cup semifinals.

Dropping out: Feyenoord.
For Orlando City coach Jason Kreis, Sunday's match against the New York Red Bulls represents a chance to get back into the win column after last week's 2-0 loss in Columbus.

"It's our first opportunity to show what kind of reaction we have as a team and how much it means to us to get results, especially at home," Kreis, whose Lions started the season with two victories, said in phone interview with ESPN FC. "I'm confident that's going to happen."

Jesse Marsch, Kreis' counterpart in New York and another of MLS' most respected young managers, sees the encounter as a litmus test for his players, too; the Red Bulls will arrive in Central Florida riding a three-game winless streak after also beginning 2017 2-0.

"Training this week," Marsch told ESPN FC, "has been very good."

It's a must-watch for supporters of both teams, who know the outcome could set the tone for the first half of the year.

Cyle Larin
Cyle Larin's goal-scoring exploits have forced clubs from Europe's biggest leagues to take notice of the Orlando forward.
Yet casual MLS fans have plenty of reason to tune into the nationally televised contest (4 p.m. ET, ESPN/ESPN Deportes/WatchESPN). After all, the Eastern Conference clash offers the chance to see two of the league's top young players -- Red Bulls midfielder Tyler Adams and Lions striker Cyle Larin -- square off for the first time.

Now in this third MLS season, Larin is the more established commodity. The 21-year-old Canadian dazzled with a rookie-record 17 goals in 2015. He's earned 19 caps with his national team, and last month the University of Connecticut product was linked to teams in several top-flight European countries. Kreis poured cold water on those reports, saying there was "no substance" to them, but it's safe to say that the powerful, clinical Larin is being watched.

As for Adams, the 18-year-old homegrown prospect has made just three career starts so far, with two of those coming in New York's past two games. The only place he is going anytime soon is South Korea for next month's FIFA U-20 World Cup, for which he recently helped the U.S. qualify.

But there's little doubt that both players have what it takes to move to a higher level at some point.

MLS has never viewed itself as a selling league. That was true last decade, even as players like Carlos Bocanegra, Clint Dempsey, Brian McBride and Ryan Nelsen left the domestic circuit and found immediate success in English Premier League. The flow of MLS players to Europe's best competitions has slowed to a trickle since then -- although DeAndre Yedlin used a breakout 2014 World Cup to secure a transfer from the Seattle Sounders to Tottenham -- the recent trend has mainly seen U.S. internationals heading home instead.

Orlando City SCOrlando City SC
New York Red BullsNew York Red Bulls
ESPN
4:00 PM ET
Game Details
PickCenter
GameCast
Lineups and Stats
The emergence of blue-chip prospects like Adams and Larin could change that.

"My goal is to be one of the best strikers in the world and the best players are over there [in Europe]," Larin said. "Leagues like La Liga, the English Premier League are all great leagues. I hope to play there one day."

Larin's numbers were down last year, but he has three goals in as many games this season. He has also improved defensively under Kreis.

"He needs to become more of a complete striker, and I think he's still learning that the work that he does defensively will often put him in a better position to attack," Kreis said. "Because he doesn't need many chances to score. That's a quality few players have."

Adams went almost a year between MLS appearances. But he helped the Red Bulls' USL affiliate win the third-tier title last season, and gained valuable first-team experience in CONCACAF Champions League play. This year he's stepped into the starting role vacated by veteran holding midfielder Dax McCarty, who was traded to the Chicago Fire in an offseason blockbuster.

Tyler Adams
After earning a place in the Red Bulls' starting XI, Tyler Adams is set to break out at the U-20 World Cup next month.
"As hard as it was to see Dax go, it was a confidence booster for me because it was obvious the coaching staff has faith in younger players to play a big role this year," Adams said.

He's taken full advantage.

"In training, there's often days when he's been our best player," Marsch said. "I don't think I've seen a player who can as easily cover ground as he does. It's just a natural gift that he has."

That ability will be on display on Sunday, and also at the U-20 World Cup. Two years ago, Matt Miazga, another former Red Bulls academy player, used that tournament to help secure a transfer to Chelsea. The Blues already know about Adams; he scored on the then-Prem champs in a 2015 friendly at Red Bull Arena. For now, Adams is happy where he is, and he's looking forward to a tough match against the Lions and their front man Larin. Fans in Orlando should enjoy watching both in the flesh while they can.

"I'm fully committed to Red Bulls," Adams said. "Whatever happens in the future, we'll see."

Doug McIntyre is a staff writer for ESPN The Magazine and ESPN FC. Follow him on Twitter @DougMacESPN.
Over the past few seasons, Justin Meram has watched a parade of wide midfielders join up with Columbus Crew SC. Last year it was Danish international Emil Larsen. The year before he had to contend with Iceland international Kristinn Steindorsson. Cedrick Mabwati was breathing down Meram's neck during both campaigns.

This season, the likes of Dilly Duka, Hector Jimenez, Christian Martinez and Niko Hansen are all competing for playing time, yet no one has been able to displace the Michigan native. To hear Meram tell it, it's gotten to the point where it has become a running joke in the Crew locker room.

Any time a new player walks into the club's training center in Obetz, Ohio, Meram's teammates will ask him, "Is he a left winger?" The ribbing no doubt reached its peak last week when manager Gregg Berhalter sent midfielder Tony Tchani and $300,000 in targeted allocation money (TAM) to the Vancouver Whitecaps for -- you guessed it -- a left winger in Kekuta Manneh.

It's a dynamic that drew a chuckle out of Meram when it was brought up.

"Gregg loves his wing play, he loves his outside midfielders," he told ESPN FC via telephone. "I can't control what he does and who he brings in. If he wants to bring in two more wingers, go for it because I'm going to work extremely hard and dedicate myself to the game and help my teammates in any way possible."

Even with the arrival of Manneh, it's clear these days that Berhalter holds Meram in high regard. Meram, 28, was just signed to a TAM-level contract extension last month, and he hasn't suffered any post-contract letdown. He scored both goals in a 2-0 win over Orlando City last weekend. The brace gave him three goals on the season to go along with two assists in just five games, as well as praise from his manager.

"When we first got here, we saw flashes of potential, but Meram wasn't a complete player yet," Berhalter said. "Now he's worked on his game so much that he's at a point where he's well rounded in many qualities, and I think that's the biggest reason for his success.

"His movement off the ball is outstanding. His defensive work rate is very good. And then I think his overall understanding of how he fits into an overall offensive scheme has improved greatly."

Justin Meram
Justin Meram is in fine form and faces another battle to keep his spot on Columbus' left flank with Kekuta Manneh.
Meram readily admits that it took him some time to hone the various parts of his game. He recalled "a lot of long nights" early in his career when he was mired on the bench behind the likes of Eddie Gaven and Robbie Rogers. He vowed to get better, but progress proved to be uneven. A spell of three goals in three games early in the 2012 campaign appeared to give him an opening, only for then-manager Robert Warzycha to take him out of the starting lineup again.

"After having a run like that, and being benched, as a young player, your mentality and confidence just immediately goes," he said. "It was tough."

For Meram, everything changed when Berhalter arrived prior to the 2014 season. The Crew manager brought with him a clear, attack-minded approach to the game that was perfectly suited to Meram's skill set.

"I was missing that direction," Meram said. "I didn't know how to move off the ball, I didn't know when to play one- and two-touch, didn't know when I could be free to showcase myself because we all know I love to have the ball at my feet, create, do something magical when the timing is right. This coaching staff came in and, as you've seen with Columbus the last couple of years, it's with a purpose, and it's with a style that fits me. They came at the perfect time."

Meram's game evolved along the way. He was more of a pure goal scorer in college, both at Yavapai College and the University of Michigan, a player content to use his speed to evade opposition defenders. In the pro game, his move to the wing forced him to be more of a provider. Last season his 13 assists tied him for third-most in the league.

"I really found a lot of joy in getting assists," he said. "The passes, just the weight of the ball, how you can play through the lines and eliminate three, four players with one great pass. More times than not, that is a better feeling than scoring. I really enjoyed seeing my teammates have success."

In a 3-2 win over the Portland Timbers on March 25, Meram enjoyed getting back among the goals as well, though it involved some mixed emotions. Had Meram been exactly where he wanted to be, he would have been thousands of miles away, suiting up for Iraq's national team in World Cup qualifiers against Australia and Saudi Arabia.


Justin Meram, right, has played for Iraq since 2014 but turned down their recent call due to the travel bans.
Meram first suited up for Iraq in 2014 after acquiring citizenship through his Iraqi-born parents. He's gone on to make over 20 appearances since. While the revised travel ban drawn up by the administration of U.S. President Donald Trump no longer included Iraq, it did include Iran, where the Lions of Mesopotamia have been forced to play many of their "home" World Cup qualifiers due to the ongoing unrest in Iraq.

The Iraq Football Association tried to convince Meram that there wouldn't be any issues, but the player ultimately decided to withdraw his name from consideration for the two matches.

Meram insisted that there was more to his decision than the travel ban but declined to go into any additional detail. However, arriving at the decision was far from easy.

"I feel the weight of millions of Iraqis, wanting for me to play," he said. "That's tough, and I love my country and love how much the fans support me wherever I go, whether I'm playing in MLS -- Iraqis come out to every [MLS] stadium basically with flags and are cheering -- or if I'm in Iran or Saudi Arabia, wherever it may be. But I don't have any regrets because this was a decision I thought long and hard about, and I had to make ultimately the decision that was best for myself and my family.

I had no regrets on my decision, and it isn't a permanent thing. We'll see in the near future how it all unfolds."

At present, Meram is focused on life with the Crew and yet another new teammate to bring into the fold. While Manneh has long been one of the more highly touted young players in the league, Meram is undaunted by the increased competition Manneh's arrival will bring.

"I see it as a positive in many ways, and he's going to push me as well," said Meram about Manneh's arrival. "I'm going to keep doing what I'm doing."

That should prove to be more than enough to keep Meram in the lineup.

Jeff Carlisle covers MLS and the U.S. national team for ESPN FC. Follow him on Twitter @JeffreyCarlisle.
Spring. To normal folk, it means blossom on the trees, blue in the sky and warmth in the air. To golfers, it means Amen Corner, Butler Cabin and green jackets. It means the Masters, and it's time for the first major grades of 2017.

We take the top 10 in the Official World Golf Rankings and then throw in a couple of others to mix it up (like Nos. 52, 53 and 54 in the OWGR). Who's plotting a steely sure path down those undulating fairways and across those lightning-fast greens? Who's over-steering them, veering from minor error to major disaster?

Dustin Johnson


Grade: F
Golf needs a new Tiger, they cried. Tiger in his prime is what they meant though. Not Tiger hobbling around with a bad back. It could be worse, though. Slipping down the stairs might be a faintly comical (if painful) way to miss the Masters, but an English cricketer once missed a match when his back went into spasm picking up a knife and fork. True story. Unless it's revealed he trod on a toy car prior to taking his tumble, Johnson has at least avoided the ignominy of topping that slapstick tale. Tough grading. Get well soon, Dustin.
World ranking: No. 1
Score: DNS

Rory McIlroy

Grade: C+
He has a reputation for making slow starts at Augusta, and whilst he only once has gone genuinely low (65 in 2011), he has only once been over-par at the 18-hole stage. The bigger problem? In five of the past seven years he has carded one round of at least 77 strokes. When he posted three front-nine bogeys, there was every chance he might do that Thursday, but he fought the evident frustration and three red numbers in four holes from the 13th transformed his fortunes. Wonderful touch at 18 saved par from off the green. Promising start.
World ranking: No. 2
Score: 72 (E)


Charley Hoffman posted a spectacular 65 on Thursday amid blustery conditions during Round 1 of the Masters. AP Photo/Matt Slocum
Jason Day

Grade: B
An emotional time, an emotional week for the Australian -- and precious little preparation for a man for whom the hard work matters. Found 10 of 14 fairways, but struggled with his approaches, hitting just 10 of 18 greens. However, he avoided 3-putts, fought for every shot and played with huge pride -- the sort of thing that makes a mum proud.
World ranking: No. 3
Score: 74 (+2)

Hideki Matsuyama

Grade: D-
For six holes the Japanese star was making serene progress at level-par, and then it all went horribly wrong. He pulled his tee shot at No. 7 into the trees on his way to double-bogey 6, then at the par-5 eighth, it was his approach that went left. More trees, another 6. He hit 14 greens but very little wanted to drop -- and making no less than three 3-putts is no recipe for success at Augusta.
World ranking: No. 4
Score: 76 (+4)

Henrik Stenson

Grade: F
In 11 previous visits to Augusta National, the Swede averaged 74.64 in Round 1 and he never looked like improving on that after opening with four bogeys in his first five holes. He found just 10 of 18 greens and actually missed the final green by 62 yards left. If you're hoping his Masters woes will end shortly, well maybe think again because history is against him and in some style. Incredibly, he has never carded a sub-70 round before the final round (in 31 tries).
World ranking: No. 5
Score: 77 (+5)

Jordan Spieth

Grade: D+
The good news: He got over his quadruple-bogey at No. 12 this time last year and made par. The bad news: He made one at No. 15 instead. Ouch. Just ouch. Has to be said, though, that grading the Texan would be difficult even had he shot 72. This is a man who had been top three at the end of his previous 11 rounds at Augusta National -- anything less than that had to be deemed a failure of some sort. Earns his grade for what he did on 12, for bouncing back from 15 with birdie at 16, and completing a great scramble on 18.
World ranking: No. 6
Score: 75 (+3)

Justin Thomas

Grade: C+
Found only seven of 14 fairways, but that didn't stop him landing 15 of 18 greens as he improved on last year's opening circuit of 76. He 3-putted No. 17 late in the day and was looking mighty chilly as he lined up a nasty 10-footer for par on the final green. He even stood off it to warm his hands before finally draining the putt. He showed a solid effort that provides momentum heading into the second round.
World ranking: No. 7
Score: 73 (+1)

Rickie Fowler

Grade: C
Oh, Rickie. At 1-under playing the final hole, he stared down a wonderful contrast to last year's opening lap of 80, everything looking so neat. Then his drive found the trees, he couldn't find the green and 3-putted. The previous 11 Masters champions all broke par in Round 1. Posting a red number would not have guaranteed Fowler joining their number, but it would have been a huge boost. Turning 1-under into 1-over the way he did will give him a sore head.
World ranking: No. 8
Score: 73 (+1)

EDITOR'S PICKS

DJ's painful departure
Dustin Johnson's unfortunate accident really, really hurt, especially since the world No. 1 came into the Masters on the best winning streak of his life.

Els not willing to call 2017 Masters his last
Ernie Els' even-par start to the Masters doesn't make him a lock to return to Augusta National in a year, but it sure doesn't hurt.

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
Adam Scott

Grade: D
Heading into this week, the Aussie had posted a 68 in five of his past six starting laps on tour, but he never looked like making it six in seven. Scott has now broken par just twice in 13 rounds at Augusta National since he slipped his arms inside the green jacket back in 2013. Three-stabbing both Nos. 17 and 18 turned an average day into a poor one. Not as far back as he might expect, but he needs to shrug off the flat feeling that has lingered for the past four years.
World ranking: No. 9
Score: 75 (+3)

Alex Noren

Grade: C+
An eight-time winner on the European Tour and third on last year's Race to Dubai, the busy Swede has never transferred that form to the top table. It's his Masters debut, but one top-10 finish in 25 WGC and major championship appearances means expectations are low. First move was good (birdie at No. 2), but four straight bogeys from the fourth were a real blow. Three late birdies at Nos. 14, 16 and 17 sharpened up the card.
World ranking: No. 10
Score: 74 (+2)

Charley Hoffman

Grade: A+
We might have to discount everything Hoffman achieved Thursday because he wasn't playing the same course as everyone else, right? Seven under? Seven?! When the next best was 3 under -- are you kidding us, Charley? In fairness, he has (almost) done it before, when a first-round 67 in 2015 left him T-2, and a recent second-round 66 at Bay Hill gave him the solo lead at the halfway mark in the Arnold Palmer Invitational. But really?! This round was other-worldly. He birdied all four par-3s (only the third player in Masters history to achieve that in one round), made nine par breakers in total, and four in a row from the 14th. Take a bow, Charley. Take a bow.
World ranking: No. 52
Score: 65 (-7)

William McGirt

Grade: A
Dude sounds like a CIA agent turned author of conspiracy theories, but he laughed in the face of Augusta National's famed difficulty for first-timers, posting the clubhouse low for the morning starters. No less than eight of the past nine winners of the Masters carded a round in the 60s on Thursday, and McGirt was the only man in the early wave to achieve that. Flipside is the best known trend in golf: No one has won as a Masters rookie since Fuzzy Zoeller in 1979. Intriguingly, McGirt's previous start in a major reaped a T-10 finish -- in last year's PGA Championship.
World ranking: No. 53
Score: 69 (-3)

Lee Westwood

Grade: A
When Westwood made a limp bogey-4 to playing partner Danny Willett's birdie-2 at the 16th hole in last year's final round, just as the pair had been confirmed as 1 and 2 on the leaderboard, pretty much everyone in the world watched and thought: "Yup, typical Westwood." Equally typical (yet less appreciated), he's back on the leaderboard, giving it another go. Nine times a top-three finisher in the majors, he has yet to find the win. Bizarrely, the end-of-round 1-2-3 on the leaderboard (Hoffman, McGirt, Westwood) are 52-53-54 in the world rankings. What are the chances of that?
World ranking: No. 54
Score: 70 (-2)
AUGUSTA, Ga. -- You know how in Wednesday's Caddie Confidential I blissfully, almost jealously, said how I'll live vicariously through my caddie friends? Well, Thursday made me wanna take the day off! If there's one thing that can make golf slower and cause caddies to end up in the unemployment line, it's wind.

Thursday takes us inside the ropes in brutal conditions and inside the caddie shack after the round for have a well-deserved beer. Here's the Round 1 Caddie Confidential!

Collins: What was it like out there today?
Caddie: It was absolute torture. Wind was swirling all over the place. In fact, it's the strongest wind I've ever (caddied) in that couldn't stick to one position. As a result it was a thoroughly unenjoyable day.

Collins: Which was the hardest hole to caddie?
Caddie: The 12th remains the hardest hole to caddie because the player doesn't have a clue and (neither) does the caddie. Everyone looks at each other, everyone points a finger at the other person. Although saying that, we did quite well.
Collins: Did you hit first?
Caddie: Let me think... yes we did.
Collins: Yesterday a couple of the caddies said it's better if the wind is strong at 12 because it doesn't swirl. How was the wind today on 12?
Caddie: Today it was a strong wind and it was swirling around like it was hot and humid! It was a nightmare, total carnage.

Collins: On a day like today, what's the most important thing for a caddie?
Caddie: I'll be honest with you. Patience. The thing is, normally when you come here and (there's) benign conditions, if you're not birdying the par 5's you know you've got no chance to win... Today, making a par on the par 5's was a pretty well-played hole. So it's more of a patience mindset knowing that you don't have to birdie every par-5 and you can play a little bit more conservatively knowing 72 is a great score.

Collins: Which was more challenging; temperature, meaning the golf ball didn't fly as far, or the direction of the wind?
Caddie: Wind direction definitely... The pins were set to feed the balls away from the holes and the wind was generally blowing across the greens in a direction you didn't want it to.

Collins: Better to play early or late in these conditions?
Caddie: Definitely playing early is an advantage at the Masters. I think with playing early the greens are just perfect and with the wind like this you can feel them crusting a little bit. I know the patrons won't like me saying that but they do crust up a little bit... It just plays trickier in the afternoon, I think.

EDITOR'S PICKS

DJ's painful departure
Dustin Johnson's unfortunate accident really, really hurt, especially since the world No. 1 came into the Masters on the best winning streak of his life.

Inspired by greats, McGirt embraces first Masters start
William McGirt likely didn't expect to top the leaderboard in his first Masters, but previous advice from golfers named Palmer, Nicklaus and Tiger helped him make the most of his Augusta debut.

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
Collins: As we sit in the caddie area late in the afternoon, the place is packed with caddies and players watching the Masters on the TVs! What's the deal?
Caddie: The beautiful thing about the caddie area is that everyone walks in all business-like. Then as soon as they walk thru the door, they take their hat off, wipe their brow, slump, walk back as if they're at a funeral to their locker till they can't get one of the (locker room attendants') eye so they can get a beer. Then they come out "refreshed!"! That's what the caddie area is all about, so we don't talk much golf here (after the round).
Collins: So what you're saying is, as soon as you walk thru the door from the driving range...
Caddie: ...you can take off your "cloak"!
Collins: And as soon as that first mouthful of beer touches the palate...
Caddie: ...it's take a deep breath. Most of us walk in (after a day in conditions like Thursday) and say, "F***ing hell, I'm glad that's over."... The thing is with this wind, and this golf course, as a number of players have shown, you can make an 8 or a 9, you can make any number at any point just by one poor shot. And you know that as the caddie. So your desire to see the ball go into the hole on the 18th is huge. Whereas on a normal day, you're struggling to make more than doubles out here. You should be smart enough, if you've been here enough times, to take a big number off the scorecard. But in wind like this, and the way it was blowing, and the decisions you (the caddie) could've made and could mess up, you could put a big number on the board here quickly.

Collins: What do you learn when you come back to the caddie area and watch the coverage on TV?
Caddie: Ah, sometimes after the round you realize you've made some pretty cool decisions yourself, when you watch some of the things that happened and some of the people making mistakes. You're like, "Yeah we made sure that didn't happen to us." So sometimes it's a pat on the back watching it.
Collins: How many times, after seeing a friend on TV have something bad happen to them, do you give them...
Caddie: ...Everytime!!! Any and every opportunity that's possible. It's absolutely part of being a caddie.

Collins: Is there anything you're looking forward to Friday for round 2?
Caddie: Um, yeah that tee shot at 10 is really enjoyable with the wind ripping off the right. You know you're going to get it around the corner. I'm looking forward to that.

Collins: What about Friday are you least looking forward to, knowing what the forecast is and having been thru Thursday's conditions?
Caddie: (On the first) I always think, "This may be the toughest first hole in golf." I'm always excited to get thru the first because there just never seems to be anywhere to hit it. When you stand there with a crosswind that you're not quite sure is into or down, it just looks like there's an upturned bowl and you have to somehow land a ball in the middle of it at perfect distance and perfect line. (laughs) When you've got a guy that's jacked up cause it's the first hole.... So yeah. I'm always excited when I've got thru the first without too much disaster.

Collins: What should people know about this place that they won't see online or on TV?
Caddie: Most people that haven't been here just cannot believe the undulation. This golf course is a serious hike. There are shots that are 25-20 yards downhill. That's the bit that nobody can see on TV.

Collins: Is it harder to club a guy off a downslope hitting to an elevated green like on 9, or off an upslope into wind like we had today?
Caddie: The hard thing is, you get so many combinations here. You'll have a downslope to an elevated green, pumping downwind. So you have to think the ball is not going to go very high, and the green's elevated so it's not going to be in the air as long, but I gotta take into account that it's blowing 20mph, and I don't wanna be long and I don't wanna be short! (Gets a look of panicked confusion on his face.) So it's easy, really. Nothing to it.
Collins: When do you have time to pop the Tylenol or Aleve?
Caddie: Three before we start! (laughing)
Collins: So is it harder off the down or upslope with wind?
Caddie: Probably the upslope. The thing is, with strong winds the impact is at least double that of downwind. Sometimes it's hard, almost impossible, to believe you're hitting a 5-iron where you'd normally be hitting an 8-iron. And it's just hard to get your head around that.
Collins: And sometimes hard to convince your player.
Caddie: Yeah. And like I said earlier that's what the public watching on TV (needs to understand). These guys will make a full swing at that in complete trust, or the really good ones do, and it's amazing.

Collins: So what's your plan for tonight?
Caddie: Gonna have a nice quiet relaxing dinner with two glasses of very nice red wine.
Collins: On weeks like this how hard is it to fall asleep?
Caddie: It's hard to stay awake.
All you need to know about the Masters, including the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.

2017 Masters 411

Tee times: Round 2

Track live round-by-round scores on the 2017 Masters leaderboard

Fantasy: Best strategy for picking Masters winner

Complete tournament coverage and schedule


EPA/Tannen Maury
Thursday: Newcomer McGirt in the lead

ESPN coverage:

8-11 p.m.: First round/Encore presentation (ESPN, WatchESPN, streaming on ESPN App)

News and analysis:

World No. 1 Dustin Johnson tried to play despite injuring himself after a fall in his rented Augusta home a day earlier, but wound up withdrawing shortly after his warm-up session. Later in the day, Charley Hoffman was atop the leaderboard:

O'Connor: Dustin Johnson's painful departure

Cooper: First-round grades

Sobel: McGirt embraces his Masters debut

Van Valkenburg: Spieth looks mortal, and it's unsettling

Video: First-round highlights

Friday: Round 2

ESPN coverage:

3-7:30 p.m. ET: Second round (ESPN, ESPN Deportes, WatchESPN, streaming on ESPN App)

8-11 p.m.: Second round/Encore presentation (ESPN, WatchESPN, streaming on ESPN App)

Masters.com live video streams:

8:30-10:30 a.m. ET: Masters on the Range

9:15 a.m.-7:30 p.m.: Featured Groups

10:45 a.m.-6 p.m.: Amen Corner live

11:45 a.m.-7 p.m.: Holes 15 and 16

Saturday: Round 3

TV coverage:

3-7:30 p.m. ET: CBS

Masters.com live video streams:

10:15 a.m.-7 p.m. ET: Featured Groups

11 a.m.-1 p.m.: Masters on the Range

11:45 a.m.-6 p.m.: Amen Corner live

12:30-6:30 p.m.: Holes 15 and 16

Sunday: Final round

TV coverage:

3-7:30 p.m. ET: CBS

Masters.com live video streams:

10:15 a.m.-7 p.m. ET: Featured Groups

11 a.m.-1 p.m.: Masters on the Range

11:45 a.m.-6 p.m: Amen Corner live

12:30-6:30 p.m: Holes 15 and 16

7 p.m.: Green jacket ceremony

Flashback: Tiger's historic victory


AP Photo/Dave Martin
A look back at Tiger Woods' first Masters win, from what it was like to play alongside him back in 1997 to his own reflections on the feat.

Harig: Witnessing Tiger's Mastery from 1997

Williams: How Tiger, in his heyday, made golf cool

How much has Tiger's first Masters win influenced the sport?

Video: Tiger on win '97 win was so crucial to his career

SPONSORED HEADLINES


 Photos Of Dubai That You Have To See To Believe
Photos Of Dubai That You Have To See To Believe
Deposts
 QUIZ: How Well Do You Know Phil at Augusta?
QUIZ: How Well Do You Know Phil at Augusta?
Callaway Golf
 Rory McIlroy 'taken aback' at reaction to Donald Trump pairing
Rory McIlroy 'taken aback' at reaction to Donald Trump pairing
espn.com/golf/
Recommended by
Comments
W2W4 at the Masters: More wild weather, cutline await golfers
play
Charley Hoffman talks to Scott Van Pelt after posting a first-round 65, giving him a 4-stroke lead, at the Masters. (0:54)
10:03 PM ET
Kevin Maguire
Golf
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook Messenger
Pinterest
Email
print
AUGUSTA, Ga. -- Any golfer thinking about Friday's cutline at the Masters better keep an eye on Charley Hoffman.

The 18-hole leader's sensational 65 on Thursday was such an outlier, if you took his score out of the mix and made the cut after 18 holes, all but three golfers in the field would keep on playing.

EDITOR'S PICKS

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
Remember, the Masters is the only major that uses the 10-shot rule, in which anyone within 10 strokes of the lead will play the weekend. That's why whatever Hoffman does on Friday is so important.

If he backs up and shoots over par, many more than the top 50 and ties will play the final 36 holes. If he's able to break 70, fewer golfers will keep on going.

A few other items to keep an eye on during Round 2:

Well, the weather outside is ... still cold and windy


Winds with gusts of up to 20 mph are expected Friday at Augusta National, the third straight day the course has been shadowed by unfavorable conditions. Rob Schumacher-USA TODAY Sports
Will conditions improve Friday? Not likely. When the first groups tee off in the morning, the temperatures are expected to be in the high 40s, reaching only the mid-60s with sustained winds in excess of 20 mph throughout the day. If there's anything pro golfers can't stand, it's strong, gusty winds, especially at a place like Augusta National. Get ready for longer-than-usual rounds and some winter clothes on golfers, especially early in the day.

Which Rory McIlroy will we see on Friday?

Will it be the one who shot 39 on the front nine or the golfer who birdied both par-5s on the back nine to finish at even-par 72? The Northern Irishman sits in 12th place after 18 holes, well within striking distance of his first Masters title, which would give him the career Grand Slam.

• McIlroy's tee time Friday: 10:34 a.m. ET.

How will Spieth rebound?

Jordan Spieth put to bed his quadruple-bogey in the final round of the 2016 Masters, but replaced it with a quad at the par-5 15th on Thursday. If he can keep the big numbers off his card in Round 2, he can easily play his way back into the mix with 36 holes to go. He's also T-41, which means missing the cut is certainly in the realm of possibility, too.

• Spieth's tee time Friday: 1:41 p.m. ET.

Other top players near the cut line

Of the players in the top 10 in the Official World Golf Ranking who teed it up in Round 1, fourth-ranked Hideki Matsuyama (T-54) and No. 5 Henrik Stenson (T-66) need to make up some ground to make the cut. The others are all inside the number heading into Friday. Stenson's record at Augusta doesn't bode well for the reigning Open champion, having finished inside the top-15 just once here, while Matsuyama finished inside the top seven in his past two Masters starts.

• Stenson and Matsuyama's tee times Friday: 9:28 a.m. and 1:19 p.m. ET.

Will Westwood build off his solid start?

Lee Westwood likely wished he could have kept on playing into the night Thursday after carding a back-nine 31 to finish in third place. Granted, the pressure was different than last year's final round, but Westwood improved his inward nine score by four shots from a year ago, when he finished second to Danny Willett by 3.

• Westwood's tee times Friday: 10:12 a.m. ET

SPONSORED HEADLINES


 Why This Shirt Company Is Causing So Many Guys to Switch
Why This Shirt Company Is Causing So Many Guys to Switch
GQ
 How to 'Fix' Crepey Skin
How to 'Fix' Crepey Skin
Health Headlines
 These Are the Best Luxury Cars
These Are the Best Luxury Cars
Yahoo Search
Recommended by
Comments
Dustin Johnson has fallen, but he can get up
play
Dustin Johnson says it is an "unbelievably difficult" decision to withdraw from the Masters and the worst part is he feels like he'll be fine in two days. (1:01)
6:26 PM ET
Bob Harig
ESPN Senior Writer
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook Messenger
Pinterest
Email
print
comment
AUGUSTA, Ga. - Dustin Johnson has had his share of misery in major championships. Not the kind of misery that forced him to withdraw from the Masters. But misery nonetheless.

Johnson, the No. 1-ranked player in the world, withdrew minutes prior to the start of his first round due to a back injury he suffered in a freak fall on stairs in his rental home.

He came to Augusta National, tried to warm up, but ultimately decided he could not compete, making him just the second No. 1 player along with Tiger Woods to not play in the Masters.

His other major championship pain was not associated with injury. But some of the high-profile cases have been impossible to forget.

At the 2010 U.S. Open, he lost the 54-hole lead by shooting a final-round 82 and eventually tied for eighth.


When Dustin Johnson was unable to play at the Masters, the media came with questions. The answers will be months in the making. Rob Carr/Getty Images
Later that summer, Johnson grounded his club in a fairway bunker on the 72nd hole of the PGA Championship, leading to a penalty that cost him a spot in a playoff won by Martin Kaymer.

A year later, he trailed by just a stroke on the back nine of The Open at Royal St. George's when he hit a 2-iron out of bounds on a reachable par-5. He ended up tied for second. Then in 2015, Johnson hit two perfect shots to the par-5 final hole at Chambers Bay, only to lose the U.S. Open to Jordan Spieth when he three-putted from 12 feet.

And just weeks after that, Johnson led The Open through two rounds at St. Andrews, only to slump over the weekend with a pair of 75s and fall into a tie for 49th.

EDITOR'S PICKS

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
Even in his lone major victory at the 2016 U.S. Open, Johnson had to endure a controversial rules issue that cost him a one-stroke penalty.

In each of these instances, Johnson eventually fought back. You don't win a tournament every season since 2008 -- the longest active streak of any player on tour -- without having some resiliency. (And let's not forget that since last year's Masters, he's won six times around the world, including a major and three World Golf Championships.)

But at least in those tournaments, Johnson had a chance to compete.

At the Masters, Johnson got to the first tee but no farther.

Comments
Ernie Els' chances at another Masters improve after Round 1

Ernie Els, who is playing in his 23rd Masters this week, finished with a bogey but still shot an even-par 72 on Thursday in the opening round at Augusta National. Tannen Maury/EPA
7:34 PM ET
Bob Harig
ESPN Senior Writer
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook Messenger
Pinterest
Email
print
comment
AUGUSTA, Ga. -- After lagging a nice putt to within short range on the first hole Thursday, Ernie Els admitted that the demons momentarily returned. Someone suggested it might be like exorcising a ghost, and Els concurred.

A year ago at Augusta National, Els described it as "snakes in my head'' when he embarrassingly needed six putts on the first green in the first round after missing a relatively short one to start it off.

He had 3 feet left for par during the opening round of the 2017 Masters.

"I had a little small one again,'' Els said. "I was really nervous over that one. It was nice to get that one in and kind of get going.''

Of course, Els followed that par with a bogey at the par-5 second and made two more to turn in 39. Then he rallied on the back nine with birdies at the 13th, 15th, 16th and 17th to get to 1 under before a final-hole bogey dropped to him even-par 72.

Even so, on a cold, blustery day, Els, 47, was thrilled. And it was so much different than a horrendous start a year ago, which saw him make the highest score in Masters history at the first -- a 9 -- on his way to a score of 80.

"We are going to be absolutely exhausted by the end of the week if this weather keeps up. This is some of the toughest conditions I've ever played in."
Ernie Els
"Obviously I'll take a 72 today in these conditions,'' said Els, who trails first-round leader Charley Hoffman by 7 and is in a tie for 12th. "And after what happened last year, it was quite different. I was hoping for an easier day. I played good golf on the back nine and you've got to keep doing what you are doing.

"We are going to be absolutely exhausted by the end of the week if this weather keeps up. This is some of the toughest conditions I've ever played in. We'll see how it goes.''

Els hit 11 of 18 greens, a strong showing in such blustery wind. He also didn't have a single 3-putt and managed to make four birdies. But of the seven greens he missed, Els saved par only three times.

EDITOR'S PICKS

DJ's painful departure
Dustin Johnson's unfortunate accident really, really hurt, especially since the world No. 1 came into the Masters on the best winning streak of his life.

Deja vu: Spieth has quadruple-bogey at Masters
Jordan Spieth had a quadruple-bogey on the par-5 15th hole in first-round action at the Masters. A year ago, Spieth made a quadruple-bogey on No. 12 during the final round at Augusta.

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
"I wouldn't say I'm a links specialist, but I like to play linksy golf,'' said Els, who won The Open in 2002 and 2012 and has four major titles among his 19 PGA Tour victories. "You had to play some of those shots today. The greens were quite receptive because of the rain, so you can play a low shot in there. Normally Augusta National doesn't receive that low shot; today it did. And I just kept doing that. I hit my driver in the fairway a lot of times and played solid on the back nine.''

Els is playing what could be his final Masters. He is here based on his victory at the 2012 Open, which came with a five-year exemption.

Barring a resurgence the rest of this season that sees him finish among the top 30 in the FedEx Cup or among the top 50 in the world, Els won't return to the Masters in 2018. He has hovered outside the top 200 in the world rankings for most of the past six months, so his best bet to return a year from now might to be finishing among the top 10 this week.

"I'd like one more, but if it doesn't happen, it doesn't happen,'' Els said. "We've had a great time. If you haven't won it in 23 goes, maybe you should try something else.
AUGUSTA, Ga. -- Any golfer thinking about Friday's cutline at the Masters better keep an eye on Charley Hoffman.

The 18-hole leader's sensational 65 on Thursday was such an outlier, if you took his score out of the mix and made the cut after 18 holes, all but three golfers in the field would keep on playing.

EDITOR'S PICKS

Masters 2017: TV schedule, news, stories, analysis
All you need to know about the Masters 2017, from the complete TV schedule, news, results, tee times and on-site coverage from Augusta National.
Remember, the Masters is the only major that uses the 10-shot rule, in which anyone within 10 strokes of the lead will play the weekend. That's why whatever Hoffman does on Friday is so important.

If he backs up and shoots over par, many more than the top 50 and ties will play the final 36 holes. If he's able to break 70, fewer golfers will keep on going.

A few other items to keep an eye on during Round 2:

Well, the weather outside is ... still cold and windy


Winds with gusts of up to 20 mph are expected Friday at Augusta National, the third straight day the course has been shadowed by unfavorable conditions. Rob Schumacher-USA TODAY Sports
Will conditions improve Friday? Not likely. When the first groups tee off in the morning, the temperatures are expected to be in the high 40s, reaching only the mid-60s with sustained winds in excess of 20 mph throughout the day. If there's anything pro golfers can't stand, it's strong, gusty winds, especially at a place like Augusta National. Get ready for longer-than-usual rounds and some winter clothes on golfers, especially early in the day.

Which Rory McIlroy will we see on Friday?

Will it be the one who shot 39 on the front nine or the golfer who birdied both par-5s on the back nine to finish at even-par 72? The Northern Irishman sits in 12th place after 18 holes, well within striking distance of his first Masters title, which would give him the career Grand Slam.

• McIlroy's tee time Friday: 10:34 a.m. ET.

How will Spieth rebound?

Jordan Spieth put to bed his quadruple-bogey in the final round of the 2016 Masters, but replaced it with a quad at the par-5 15th on Thursday. If he can keep the big numbers off his card in Round 2, he can easily play his way back into the mix with 36 holes to go. He's also T-41, which means missing the cut is certainly in the realm of possibility, too.

• Spieth's tee time Friday: 1:41 p.m. ET.

Other top players near the cut line

Of the players in the top 10 in the Official World Golf Ranking who teed it up in Round 1, fourth-ranked Hideki Matsuyama (T-54) and No. 5 Henrik Stenson (T-66) need to make up some ground to make the cut. The others are all inside the number heading into Friday. Stenson's record at Augusta doesn't bode well for the reigning Open champion, having finished inside the top-15 just once here, while Matsuyama finished inside the top seven in his past two Masters starts.

• Stenson and Matsuyama's tee times Friday: 9:28 a.m. and 1:19 p.m. ET.

Will Westwood build off his solid start?

Lee Westwood likely wished he could have kept on playing into the night Thursday after carding a back-nine 31 to finish in third place. Granted, the pressure was different than last year's final round, but Westwood improved his inward nine score by four shots from a year ago, when he finished second to Danny Willett by 3.

• Westwood's tee times Friday: 10:12 a.m. ET

SPONSORED HEADLINES


 QUIZ: How Well Do You Know Phil at Augusta?
QUIZ: How Well Do You Know Phil at Augusta?
Callaway Golf
 Don’t Buy Furniture Until You See This Site
Don’t Buy Furniture Until You See This Site
Wayfair
 Have You Ever Noticed That Tiny Mistake?
Have You Ever Noticed That Tiny Mistake?
TimezOff
Recommended by
Comments
Inside Odor, Rory's head games and a nightmare in N.J.

Rick Yeatts/Getty Images
9:39 AM ET
Mike Vorkunov for REDEF
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook Messenger
Pinterest
Email
print
comment
Sports Redef
sports + biz + culture + life
Get REDEF delivered to your inbox

rantnrave:// Goodbye, St. Anthony High School. The famed basketball powerhouse is closing. This is remarkable news. Not that a private school will close so abruptly -- Catholic schools have been closing at an increased rate in recent years -- but that a program like that will go down this way. We're in the age of seemingly unscrupulous scavenges for talent and success in high school sports, in New Jersey especially. It's a state I grew up in and worked in. I've documented shady schools and coaches desperate for victories, but St. Anthony, despite its prowess, will go down with a clean record. Bob Hurley, its Hall of Fame coach, is the dean of high school basketball coaches. It's shocking he'll lose his job this way. The school had been operating on a lifeline for a while but the end still seems jarring. This should at least put "The Miracle of St. Anthony" on top of your reading list. One of the best sports books I've read, intricately written by Adrian Wojnarowski. ... We let them into our living rooms every night. They don't just call the games, they are a part of the experience. And they have some stories of their own to tell. Our REDEF SportsSet: "Soundtrack of Sports: The Stories Behind the Voices". ... The U.S. women's national team got paid, finally. It reached an agreement with U.S. Soccer on a new CBA. The best U.S. soccer team should be paid like it. Female athletes are leading the labor movement. ... The Masters begins today. This is how you win. What's the bigger wild card: How Jordan Spieth comes back after his collapse last year or if Rory McIlroy can get out of his own head on a course that has caused him angst? ... How long until we have our first big-time college esports league? The University of Utah will start its own team and dole out scholarships. Will the NCAA weigh in? ... The 2018 Miami Marlins' motto: Please clap.


12 rounds with Rougned Odor, the toughest player in baseball

Rougned Odor will always be known for famously punching Toronto Blue Jays star Jose Bautista. But his friends and family know there is much more to him than that.
Eric Nusbaum | Vice Sports


Jim Nantz, in a cynical media world, is one shining moment unlike any other

Polished pro to some and 'smarmy greeting card' to others, the CBS announcer makes no apologies for his positive outlook.
Rick Maese | The Washington Post


Is Augusta in Rory's head?

The Masters is all that stands between Rory McIlroy and a career Grand Slam. But that's where things get complicated.
Brian Wacker | Golf Digest


Broken promises & disposable players: The remarkable story behind a high school sports scandal

The players came to Paterson Eastside from Nigeria, Paraguay and Puerto Rico in search of their own hoops dream. Most found something much closer to a nightmare.
Matthew Stanmyre & Steve Politi | NJ Advance Media


In praise of Tony Romo, who got out while he was still alive

The Cowboys quarterback will be a whole lot safer in the broadcast booth than he was on the football field.
Mike Shropshire | Slate

Redef
"It's not enough to be smart. You have to be curious."

Get REDEF delivered to your inbox

SPONSORED HEADLINES


 Can you Pass this March Madness Quiz? [Quiz]
Can you Pass this March Madness Quiz? [Quiz]
Definition
 Changing runs in changing worlds
Changing runs in changing worlds
on-running
 Teen Goes Missing In Aruba. But 10 Years Later, Police Uncover Truth
Teen Goes Missing In Aruba. But 10 Years Later, Police Uncover Truth
Direct Expose
Recommended by
Comments
Making trophy cases: Here's who will win the Calder, Norris, Vezina, Calder and Jack Adams

Connor McDavid, left, leads the league in points, while Sidney Crosby is tops in goals. Who will be named MVP? Perry Nelson-USA TODAY Sports
10:35 AM ET
Scott Burnside
ESPN Senior Writer
Facebook
Twitter
Facebook Messenger
Pinterest
Email
print
comment
Hockey writers, broadcasters and GMs will cast their votes in the coming days for each of the league's major end-of-season awards. Here are my finalists and how I think things might shake out when the hardware is handed out in late June in Las Vegas.

Hart Trophy

Winner: Connor McDavid, Edmonton Oilers
Finalists: Sidney Crosby, Pittsburgh Penguins; Erik Karlsson, Ottawa Senators

The smoke has cleared a little on what was once a rather crowded field at the top of the Hart Trophy race. It could get more crowded if Nikita Kucherov leads the Tampa Bay Lightning to a playoff berth, but that looks highly unlikely.

That brings us back to the Oilers captain, who is about to win his first NHL scoring title at the tender age of 20. McDavid has been as consistent as the day is long, and he didn't just get his hard-luck team to the postseason for the first time since 2006. He also has Edmonton challenging for home-ice advantage while leading the league with 1.20 points per game.

Crosby is going to win the Rocket Richard Trophy, awarded to the leading goal scorer, and boasted a 1.18 points per game pace while steadying a Penguins team beset by a host of injuries. I included Karlsson over other worthy finalists Brad Marchand, Sergei Bobrovsky and Brent Burns because of how much the Swede's game has evolved this season (more on that below).

Norris Trophy

Winner: Erik Karlsson, Ottawa Senators
Finalists: Brent Burns, San Jose Sharks; Duncan Keith, Chicago Blackhawks

I didn't have Karlsson at the top of my ballot the first two times he won this award, which is given to the league's best defenseman. But it's hard to ignore his role in guiding the Senators to what would be a wholly unexpected playoff berth this spring. If the criticism of Karlsson has been that he's a one-dimensional figure, the fact that he leads the NHL in blocked shots this season should dramatically change the perception of the slick-skating defender.

Burns looked like he was going to run away with this trophy -- and perhaps be a serious Hart Trophy contender -- earlier this season, but the last few months haven't been as kind to Burns or the Sharks. As for Keith, he has quietly put together one of his best seasons and reminded us why he's a two-time Norris Trophy winner and a former playoff MVP.


It's no stretch to say that Sergei Bobrovsky has been the Blue Jackets' MVP. Jamie Sabau/NHLI via Getty Images
Vezina Trophy

Winner: Sergei Bobrovsky, Columbus Blue Jackets
Finalists: Carey Price, Montreal Canadiens; Devan Dubnyk, Minnesota Wild

This would be Bobrovsky's second Vezina Trophy, pairing with his first, in 2013. In between, he struggled with injury and consistency -- so the 28-year-old's return to the top of the goaltending heap is even more impressive. Quite simply, no player has been more important to the Blue Jackets' surprise season than Bobrovsky. He deserves the nod ahead of Price, who has been quietly exceptional, especially at even strength, for the Atlantic Division-champion Canadiens. (Price told colleague Pierre LeBrun that even he would give the Vezina to Bobrovsky.)

Dubnyk, meanwhile, is paying the price for late swoons by both him and his team. Although Dubnyk looked, for much of the season, to be the front-runner for the award, the fact his numbers trailed off late should not diminish his accomplishments this season.

Calder Trophy

Winner: Auston Matthews, Toronto Maple Leafs
Finalists: Patrik Laine, Winnipeg Jets; Zach Werenski, Columbus Blue Jackets

This season featured many superlative first-year performances. But in the end, the choice turned out to not as difficult as it would have been a month ago. While Laine and the Jets faded down the stretch, with Winnipeg missing the playoffs yet again, Matthews and the Maple Leafs soared toward an almost-certain postseason berth -- and are even battling for home-ice advantage. Given the fact that Matthews is a center who set the record for most goals by American rookie, not to mention that the roster around him is also painfully young, there isn't really any debate about who is the top rookie.

Laine's 36 goals made him an easy choice for second on my ballot, while in another season, it might have been Werenski getting the hardware. Still, the 19-year-old defenseman -- who has been out of the lineup with an injury -- should be more than satisfied with a rock-solid rookie campaign and a trip to the postseason with the Blue Jackets.